 Bioinformatics I - H S 2023 lecture slides are partially based on an earlier Bioinfo1 lecture by Johannes Ftterer, ETH Z. Dr. Christian von Mering mering@mls.uzh.ch lectures lectures on biological sequence in biology, biology and molecular biology. The lecture will be presented at 19.09.2023 at the University of Zurich University in Zurich, Switzerland. The lectures are expected to be presented by Dr. Mering at 7.30pm on September 19th, October 20th and October 28th.

 Challenge: Find the best possible alignment of identical and similar sequences. We need a formalized scoring system, to describe and measure similarities, and to develop statistics. General scoring systems are context independent (i.e. values are the same for every occurence of a given pair) They can be written in form of a simple matrix : e.g. Nucleotide identity matrix. Matrices show scoring values M for every conceivable pair i and j. ij Matrices are symmetrical Scoring values for sequence alignments.

 PA M = Point Accepted Mutation (or percent accepted mutation) PA M1 reflects an evolutionary distance where 1% of characters have been changed. Alignment score = probability that the sequences confirm the working hypothesis, i.e. they are very closely related (1% difference) = product of matrix values for every pair in the alignment Matrix for greater divergence. Log-odds matrix: total alignment score determined by addition of individual s values ij (instead of multiplication of individual probability values) Alignments without gaps (only substitutions allowed): seq 1 is closer related to seq 2 than to seq 3.

 DN A comparison is only useful for closely related sequences or highly conserved motives. Amino acids are differentially related to each other 1. required steps for mutation (distance): e.g. Thr codons (AC N) Ser (UC N) Cys (UG Y) (at least two steps) Many different possibilities for reasonable substitution matrices based on comparisons of evolutionary related proteins. PA M concept was developed for amino acid substitutions based on a model of protein evolution. Alignment of 3D structures can act as ground truth of biologically meaningful alignment.

 Different matrices reflect different evolutionary relationships. Alignment matrix: Positions with locally positive. Algorithms calculate optimal alignment for all nodes to the left and right. Algorithm: A C G G G A C T T T A C C G A T G C T A T T - - - x x x - x. x x. - x X. - X. x - X x - - X - x -. x. X.. - A C. G T G T T represents the endpoint of an alignment, ie. - T. T - T - G T - C G T represents an alignment node.

 FAST A: FAS T-Allipman and Pearson, 1985; Pearson and Lipman, 1988. Algorithms: Needleman-Wunsch (global) / Smith-Waterman (local) Highest possible alignment score guaranteed but calculation-time and storage intensive. Solution: restrict search space by pre-selection of promising regions. Sequences with significant similarity contain short strings (1 query in all possible words with identity) Divide word lengths for amino acids; 6 words to 14 amino acids for DN A.

 FAST A (Pearson and Lipmap, 1988) speed is largely determined by ktup size for finding the initial identities: the longer the faster, but with reduced sensitivity. BLAS T: Search for ungapped regions sharing more than one exact k-tupleFAST A, 1988: Search two hits within a predefined distance (e.g. <40 amino acids) on a diagonal and combine them in a high scoring segment pair (HS P) 3. Initiate gapped extension (dynamic programming) only on the best HSPBLAS T words (neighborhood words)

 BLAS T programs programs can be used with many different databases or subsections of databases. BLAS T program programs are optimized for aligning longer sequences that differ only slightly uses longer words and a different algorithm (greedy algorithm) MegaBLAS T uses a different type of words for initiation of alignments: words can be discontiguous, e.g. 11 or 12 matches in a template region of 16, 18 or 21 nucleotides (option in blastp) BLAS T1.4 first BLAS T version QBLAS T =BLAS T2.0 current NCB I default; 2 hit search strategy for increased speed; performs gapped BLAS T.

 Multiple Sequence Alignment software is a guide to intelligent mutagenesis for functional analyses. Phylogeny reconstruction is based on gene/protein sequences from partial sequences. An alternative view of the traditional version of the tree of life emphasizes some problems Generating phylogenetic trees - from gene and protein sequences - is a good way to make phylogenetic inferrences (trees) Back to Mail Online home. Back to the page you came from: http://en.org/wiki/Sequence_alignment_software.html.

 PA M distance 3.3 (Human - Monkey) is the minimum. So we'll join Human and Monkey to Mon Hum and we'll calculate the new distances. We do this with a simple average of distances: Dist[Spinach, Mon Hum] = (Dist[Spiach, Monkey] + Dist[MMon Hum] + (Spiac, Monkey)/2 = (90.8 + 86.3)/2 = 88.55 Mon-Hum Spinach Human Monkey Next cycle Mos-(Mon-Hum)